README.md, before:

# Benchmark N-Body system

Here are some elapsed times (in s) for 5 **implementations** (of course, these
numbers do not characterized the languages but only particular implementations
in some languages).

| # particles |   Py | C++ nbabel.org | Fortran nbabel.org | Julia nbabel.org | Rust |
|-------------|------|----------------|--------------------|------------------|------|
|     1024    |   30 |      55        |         41         |        45        |   34 |
|     2048    |  124 |     231        |        166         |       173        |  137 |
|    16384    | 7220 |   14640        |      10914         |     11100        |    ? |

The implementations in C++, Fortran and Julia come from https://www.nbabel.org/
and have been used in an article published in Nature Astronomy
([Zwart, 2020](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2009.11295.pdf)). The results of this
updated benchmark was summarized in [Augier et al., 2021](https://rdcu.be/ciO0J)
(see how to [cite the article](#Citation)).

The implementation in Python-Numpy is very simple, but uses
[Transonic](https://transonic.readthedocs.io) and
[Pythran](https://pythran.readthedocs.io) (>=0.9.8).

To run these benchmarks, go into the different directories and run `make
bench1k` or `make bench2k`.

To give an idea of what it gives compared to the figure published in Nature Astronomy:

![image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/paugier/nbabel/master/py/fig/fig_ecolo_impact_transonic.png)

**Note:** these benchmarks are run sequentially with a Intel(R) Core(TM)
i5-8400 CPU @ 2.80GHz.

**Note 2:** With Numba, the elapsed times are 44 s, 153 s and 11490 s,
respectively. This is approximately 20% faster than the C++ implementation.

**Note 3:** With PyPy, a pure Python implementation (bench_pypy_Point.py) runs
for 1024 particles in 133 s, i.e. only 2.4 times slower than the C++
implementation (compared to ~50 times slower as shown in the figure taken from
Zwart, 2020). Moreover, with a new version of PyPy (branch map-improvements,
merged in default on Feb 02 2021, so one can use a [nightly
build](https://buildbot.pypy.org/nightly/py3.7/)), another implementation
(bench_purepy_Particle.py) runs in 55 s, i.e. same speed than the C++
implementation!

**Note 4:** The directory "julia" contains some more advanced and faster
implementations. The sequential optimized Julia implementation runs on my PC in
22 s, 82 s and 5340 s, respectively (i.e. 25-30% faster than our fast and
simple Python implementation).

**Note 5:** From the high level Numpy implementation
(bench_numpy_highlevel.py), if one (i) adds an import `from transonic import
jit` and (ii) decorates the function `loop` with `@jit`, the case for 1024
particles runs in 136 s (2.5 times slower than the C++ implementation).

**Note 6:** The directory "cpp" contains a faster C++ implementation (proposed
by [@bolverk](https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/pull/16)) which runs on my PC
in 25 s, 104 s and 7100 s, respectively.

## Table of codes

See [run_benchmarks.py](https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/power/run_benchmarks.py).

|   Legend figure    |        Source code                            |
|:------------------:|:---------------------------------------------:|
|   C++ nbabel.org   | [main.cpp][main.cpp]                          |
| Fortran nbabel.org | [nbabel.f03][nbabel.f03]                      |
|   Pythran naive    | [bench_numpy_highlevel_jit.py][pythran-naive] |
|        PyPy        | [bench_purepy_Particle.py][purepy_Particle]   |
|        Numba       | [bench_numba.py][bench_numba.py]              |
|       Pythran      | [bench.py][bench.py]                          |
|        Julia       | [naive_lowlevel.jl][naive_lowlevel.jl]        |
|   Julia optimized  | [nbabel5_serial.jl][nbabel5_serial.jl]        |
|  Pythran paralllel | [bench_omp.py][bench_omp.py]                  |
|   Julia parallel   | [nbabel5_threads.jl][nbabel5_threads.jl]      |

[main.cpp]:   https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/cpp/main.cpp
[nbabel.f03]: https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/fortran/nbabel.f03
[pythran-naive]: https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/py/bench_numpy_highlevel_jit.py
[purepy_Particle]: https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/py/bench_purepy_Particle.py
[bench_numba.py]: https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/py/bench_numba.py
[bench.py]: https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/py/bench.py
[naive_lowlevel.jl]: https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/julia/naive_lowlevel.jl
[nbabel5_serial.jl]: https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/julia/nbabel5_serial.jl
[bench_omp.py]: https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/py/bench_omp.py
[nbabel5_threads.jl]: https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/julia/nbabel5_threads.jl

## Citation

```bib
@article{nbabel2021,
  title = {Reducing the Ecological Impact of Computing through Education and {{Python}} Compilers},
  author = {Augier, Pierre and {Bolz-Tereick}, Carl Friedrich and Guelton, Serge and Mohanan, Ashwin Vishnu},
  year = {2021},
  month = apr,
  volume = {5},
  pages = {334--335},
  publisher = {{Nature Publishing Group}},
  issn = {2397-3366},
  doi = {10.1038/s41550-021-01342-y},
  journal = {Nature Astronomy},
  language = {en},
  number = {4}
}
```

Commit message:

Add a C++ implementation using arrays by @isuruf

README.md, after:

# Benchmark N-Body system

Here are some elapsed times (in s) for 5 **implementations** (of course, these
numbers do not characterized the languages but only particular implementations
in some languages).

| # particles |   Py | C++ nbabel.org | Fortran nbabel.org | Julia nbabel.org | Rust |
|-------------|------|----------------|--------------------|------------------|------|
|     1024    |   30 |      55        |         41         |        45        |   34 |
|     2048    |  124 |     231        |        166         |       173        |  137 |
|    16384    | 7220 |   14640        |      10914         |     11100        |    ? |

The implementations in C++, Fortran and Julia come from https://www.nbabel.org/
and have been used in an article published in Nature Astronomy
([Zwart, 2020](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2009.11295.pdf)). The results of this
updated benchmark was summarized in [Augier et al., 2021](https://rdcu.be/ciO0J)
(see how to [cite the article](#Citation)).

The implementation in Python-Numpy is very simple, but uses
[Transonic](https://transonic.readthedocs.io) and
[Pythran](https://pythran.readthedocs.io) (>=0.9.8).

To run these benchmarks, go into the different directories and run `make
bench1k` or `make bench2k`.

To give an idea of what it gives compared to the figure published in Nature Astronomy:

![image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/paugier/nbabel/master/py/fig/fig_ecolo_impact_transonic.png)

**Note:** these benchmarks are run sequentially with a Intel(R) Core(TM)
i5-8400 CPU @ 2.80GHz.

**Note 2:** With Numba, the elapsed times are 44 s, 153 s and 11490 s,
respectively. This is approximately 20% faster than the C++ implementation.

**Note 3:** With PyPy, a pure Python implementation (bench_pypy_Point.py) runs
for 1024 particles in 133 s, i.e. only 2.4 times slower than the C++
implementation (compared to ~50 times slower as shown in the figure taken from
Zwart, 2020). Moreover, with a new version of PyPy (branch map-improvements,
merged in default on Feb 02 2021, so one can use a [nightly
build](https://buildbot.pypy.org/nightly/py3.7/)), another implementation
(bench_purepy_Particle.py) runs in 55 s, i.e. same speed than the C++
implementation!

**Note 4:** The directory "julia" contains some more advanced and faster
implementations. The sequential optimized Julia implementation runs on my PC in
22 s, 82 s and 5340 s, respectively (i.e. 25-30% faster than our fast and
simple Python implementation).

**Note 5:** From the high level Numpy implementation
(bench_numpy_highlevel.py), if one (i) adds an import `from transonic import
jit` and (ii) decorates the function `loop` with `@jit`, the case for 1024
particles runs in 136 s (2.5 times slower than the C++ implementation).

**Note 6:** The directory "cpp" also contains 2 faster C++ implementations
(proposed by [@bolverk](https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/pull/16) and
[@isuruf](https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/pull/17)) which run on my PC in 25
s, 104 s and 7080 s for the [AoS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AoS_and_SoA)
implementation by @bolverk and 26s, 104 s and 7330 s for the
[SoA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AoS_and_SoA) implementation by @isuruf.
Note that there is a problem with the conservation of energy.

## Table of codes

See [run_benchmarks.py](https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/power/run_benchmarks.py).

|   Legend figure    |        Source code                            |
|:------------------:|:---------------------------------------------:|
|   C++ nbabel.org   | [main.cpp][main.cpp]                          |
| Fortran nbabel.org | [nbabel.f03][nbabel.f03]                      |
|   Pythran naive    | [bench_numpy_highlevel_jit.py][pythran-naive] |
|        PyPy        | [bench_purepy_Particle.py][purepy_Particle]   |
|        Numba       | [bench_numba.py][bench_numba.py]              |
|       Pythran      | [bench.py][bench.py]                          |
|        Julia       | [naive_lowlevel.jl][naive_lowlevel.jl]        |
|   Julia optimized  | [nbabel5_serial.jl][nbabel5_serial.jl]        |
|  Pythran paralllel | [bench_omp.py][bench_omp.py]                  |
|   Julia parallel   | [nbabel5_threads.jl][nbabel5_threads.jl]      |

[main.cpp]:   https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/cpp/main.cpp
[nbabel.f03]: https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/fortran/nbabel.f03
[pythran-naive]: https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/py/bench_numpy_highlevel_jit.py
[purepy_Particle]: https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/py/bench_purepy_Particle.py
[bench_numba.py]: https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/py/bench_numba.py
[bench.py]: https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/py/bench.py
[naive_lowlevel.jl]: https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/julia/naive_lowlevel.jl
[nbabel5_serial.jl]: https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/julia/nbabel5_serial.jl
[bench_omp.py]: https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/py/bench_omp.py
[nbabel5_threads.jl]: https://github.com/paugier/nbabel/blob/reply-zwart2020/julia/nbabel5_threads.jl

## Citation

```bib
@article{nbabel2021,
  title = {Reducing the Ecological Impact of Computing through Education and {{Python}} Compilers},
  author = {Augier, Pierre and {Bolz-Tereick}, Carl Friedrich and Guelton, Serge and Mohanan, Ashwin Vishnu},
  year = {2021},
  month = apr,
  volume = {5},
  pages = {334--335},
  publisher = {{Nature Publishing Group}},
  issn = {2397-3366},
  doi = {10.1038/s41550-021-01342-y},
  journal = {Nature Astronomy},
  language = {en},
  number = {4}
}
```
