julia/README.md, before:

## Alternative implementations of the Julia version

`nbabel.jl` is the implementation mentioned in the main README.

The `nbabel4` implementations use a custom Particle struct with 4
Float64 fields to maximize the performance of SIMD operations.

`nbabel4_serial.jl`:  only runs in serial.

`nbabel4_threads.jl`: runs with one or multiple processors. (use the `-tN` flag)

Benchmarks measure the time reported by system time, as output by the `Makefile` commands.

`@inbounds` flags are added to O(N^2) loops, but the benchmark appears to be somewhat
dependent on bounds checking anyway, particularly for the parallel version, which
allocates larger arrays for non-concurrent sums. Thus, two benchmarks were performed, with and
without a global flag to avoid bounds checking:

### Single-threaded in a Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8550U CPU @ 1.80GHz

With julia flags `-O3 --check-bounds=no`:

| # particles |  nbabel.jl | nbabel_serial.jl | nbabel4_threads.jl |
|-------------|------------|------------------|--------------------|
|     1024    |    50.2    |    31.1          |      34.4          |
|     2048    |   201.5    |   120.1          |     109.3          |

With julia flag `-O3` only:

| # particles |  nbabel.jl | nbabel_serial.jl | nbabel4_threads.jl |
|-------------|------------|------------------|--------------------|
|     1024    |    48.1    |    28.0          |    36.6            |
|     2048    |   188.5    |   111.8          |   147.7            |


### With 4 processors (the laptop has 4):

With julia flags `-O3 --check-bounds=no -t4`:

| # particles | nbabel4_threads.jl |
|-------------|--------------------|
|     1024    |   19.9             |
|     2048    |   82.1             |

With julia flags `-O3` only:

| # particles | nbabel4_threads.jl |
|-------------|--------------------|
|     1024    |   24.9             |
|     2048    |   91.7             |

- Differences smaller than about 10% are probably not significant.

## Requirements

All versions require the `DelimitedFiles` package. Install with:

```julia
julia> ] add DelimitedFiles

```

(Julia version 1.5 or greater is recommended)

Commit message:

Bench 16k for Python and Julia

julia/README.md, after:

## Alternative implementations of the Julia version

`nbabel.jl` is the implementation mentioned in the main README.

The `nbabel4` implementations use a custom Particle struct with 4
Float64 fields to maximize the performance of SIMD operations.

`nbabel4_serial.jl`:  only runs in serial.

`nbabel4_threads.jl`: runs with one or multiple processors. (use the `-tN` flag)

Benchmarks measure the time reported by system time, as output by the `Makefile` commands.

`@inbounds` flags are added to O(N^2) loops, but the benchmark appears to be somewhat
dependent on bounds checking anyway, particularly for the parallel version, which
allocates larger arrays for non-concurrent sums. Thus, two benchmarks were performed, with and
without a global flag to avoid bounds checking.

[This page of the Julia
forum](https://discourse.julialang.org/t/nbabel-nbody-integrator-speed-up)
shows the work done for these optimized implementations.

### Single-threaded in a Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8550U CPU @ 1.80GHz

With julia flags `-O3 --check-bounds=no`:

| # particles |  nbabel.jl | nbabel_serial.jl | nbabel4_threads.jl |
|-------------|------------|------------------|--------------------|
|     1024    |    50.2    |    31.1          |      34.4          |
|     2048    |   201.5    |   120.1          |     109.3          |

With julia flag `-O3` only:

| # particles |  nbabel.jl | nbabel_serial.jl | nbabel4_threads.jl |
|-------------|------------|------------------|--------------------|
|     1024    |    48.1    |    28.0          |    36.6            |
|     2048    |   188.5    |   111.8          |   147.7            |


### With 4 processors (the laptop has 4):

With julia flags `-O3 --check-bounds=no -t4`:

| # particles | nbabel4_threads.jl |
|-------------|--------------------|
|     1024    |   19.9             |
|     2048    |   82.1             |

With julia flags `-O3` only:

| # particles | nbabel4_threads.jl |
|-------------|--------------------|
|     1024    |   24.9             |
|     2048    |   91.7             |

- Differences smaller than about 10% are probably not significant.

## Requirements

All versions require the `DelimitedFiles` package. Install with:

```julia
julia> ] add DelimitedFiles

```

(Julia version 1.5 or greater is recommended)
