mojo/README.md, before:

# Mojo implementations of the n-body problem

- bench.mojo: reference implementation with a Particle struct
- bench_no_part.mojo: implementation without Particle struct (instead
  `InlinedFixedVector[Vec4floats]`)
- bench_simd.mojo: explicit simd with tile or vectorize

The code using explicit SIMD is in particles.mojo and bench_simd.mojo, and the
code in particles.mojo is also tested for different sizes of SIMD vector (`nelts`)
in mokowals_experiments.mojo. These tests seem to pass. The only function that
uses SIMD is `accelerate` (if has 2 variants using `tile` and `vectorize`).

## Performance

I compare sequential implementations in Python (bench_compyler.py), Julia
(nbabel5_serial.jl) and Mojo. We have a quite efficient implementation in pure
Python using PyPy. On recent computers with a good CPU, we can get interesting
speedup with Julia and Mojo.

- On a computer for which `simdwidthof[DType.float64]()` gives 4 (AMD Ryzen 7
  7730U), I get:

|                                  | time (s) |
| -------------------------------- | -------- |
| PyPy                             | 45       |
| Julia                            | 20       |
| bench.mojo                       | 23       |
| bench_no_part.mojo               | 22       |
| mojo -D nelts=2 bench_simd.mojo  | 16.4     |
| mojo -D nelts=4 bench_simd.mojo  | 9.2      |
| mojo -D nelts=16 bench_simd.mojo | 7.3      |

- On a computer for which `simdwidthof[DType.float64]()` gives 4 (i5-8400 CPU @
  2.80GHz), I get:

|                                  | time (s) |
| -------------------------------- | -------- |
| PyPy                             | 74       |
| Julia                            | 26       |
| bench.mojo                       | 30       |
| bench_no_part.mojo               | 27       |
| mojo -D nelts=2 bench_simd.mojo  | 20       |
| mojo -D nelts=4 bench_simd.mojo  | 16       |
| mojo -D nelts=16 bench_simd.mojo | 13       |

## Correctness

I am a bit septical about the correctness of the implementations in Mojo. The
results do not seem numerically reliable and I observe something like a numerical
instability. The energy is not conserved and for some time steps, there is a
discontinuity in energy.

Moreover, the results can be different for different values of the alias `nelts`,
and also when using `accelerate_tile` or `accelerate_vectorize`.

Commit message:

Mojo README: perf and delta energy for PC meige8pcpa79

mojo/README.md, after:

# Mojo implementations of the n-body problem

- bench.mojo: reference implementation with a Particle struct
- bench_no_part.mojo: implementation without Particle struct (instead
  `InlinedFixedVector[Vec4floats]`)
- bench_simd.mojo: explicit simd with tile or vectorize

The code using explicit SIMD is in particles.mojo and bench_simd.mojo, and the
code in particles.mojo is also tested for different sizes of SIMD vector (`nelts`)
in mokowals_experiments.mojo. These tests seem to pass. The only function that
uses SIMD is `accelerate` (if has 2 variants using `tile` and `vectorize`).

## Performance

I compare sequential implementations in Python (bench_compyler.py), Julia
(nbabel5_serial.jl) and Mojo. We have a quite efficient implementation in pure
Python using PyPy. On recent computers with a good CPU, we can get interesting
speedup with Julia and Mojo.

- On a computer for which `simdwidthof[DType.float64]()` gives 4 (AMD Ryzen 7
  7730U), I get:

|                                  | time (s) |
| -------------------------------- | -------- |
| PyPy                             | 45       |
| Julia                            | 20       |
| bench.mojo                       | 23       |
| bench_no_part.mojo               | 22       |
| mojo -D nelts=2 bench_simd.mojo  | 16.4     |
| mojo -D nelts=4 bench_simd.mojo  | 9.2      |
| mojo -D nelts=16 bench_simd.mojo | 7.3      |

- On a computer for which `simdwidthof[DType.float64]()` gives 4 (i5-8400 CPU @
  2.80GHz), I get:

|                                  | time (s) |
| -------------------------------- | -------- |
| PyPy                             | 74       |
| Julia                            | 26       |
| bench.mojo                       | 30       |
| bench_no_part.mojo               | 27       |
| mojo -D nelts=2 bench_simd.mojo  | 20       |
| mojo -D nelts=4 bench_simd.mojo  | 16       |
| mojo -D nelts=16 bench_simd.mojo | 13       |

- On a computer for which `simdwidthof[DType.float64]()` gives 4 (Intel(R) Xeon(R)
  CPU E5-1603 v3 @ 2.80GHz), I get:

|                                  | time (s) | (E - E0) / E0 (%) |
| -------------------------------- | -------- | ----------------- |
| PyPy                             | 113      | -10               |
| Julia                            | 56       | -11               |
| bench.mojo                       | 80       | -95               |
| bench_no_part.mojo               | 80       | -406              |
| mojo -D nelts=2 bench_simd.mojo  | 54       | -23               |
| mojo -D nelts=4 bench_simd.mojo  | 58       | -1004             |
| mojo -D nelts=16 bench_simd.mojo | 54       | -162              |

## Correctness

I am a bit septical about the correctness of the implementations in Mojo. The
results do not seem numerically reliable and I observe something like a numerical
instability. The energy is not conserved (see the values of (E - E0) / E0 in the
previous tables) and for some time steps, there is a discontinuity in energy.

Moreover, the results can be different for different values of the alias `nelts`,
and also when using `accelerate_tile` or `accelerate_vectorize`.
